source/rst/lucas_asset_pricing_dles.rst, before:

.. _lucas_asset_pricing_dles:

.. include:: /_static/includes/lecture_howto_py.raw

.. index::
    single: python

******************************
Lucas Asset Pricing Using DLE
******************************

.. contents:: :depth: 2

**Co-author:** Sebastian Graves

In addition to what's in Anaconda, this lecture uses the quantecon  library

.. code-block:: ipython
  :class: hide-output

  !pip install quantecon

This lecture uses  the DLE class to price payout
streams that are linear functions of the economy's state vector, as well
as risk-free assets that pay out one unit of the first consumption good
with certainty

We assume basic knowledge of the class of economic environments that fall within the domain of the
DLE class

Many details about the basic environment are contained in the lecture
"Growth in Dynamic Linear Economies"

We'll also need the following imports

.. code-block:: ipython

    import numpy as np
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
    from quantecon import LQ
    from quantecon import DLE
    %matplotlib inline

We use a linear-quadratic version of an economy that Lucas (1978) :cite:`Lucas1978` used
to develop an equilibrium theory of asset prices:

**Preferences**

.. math::  -\frac{1}{2}\mathbb{E}\sum_{t=0}^\infty \beta^t[(c_t - b_t)^2 + l_t^2]|J_0 

.. math:: s_t = c_t

.. math:: b_t = U_bz_t

**Technology**

.. math::  c_t = d_{1t} 

.. math::  k_t = \delta_k k_{t-1} + i_t 

.. math::  g_t = \phi_1 i_t \, , \phi_1 > 0 

.. math::

    \left[ {\begin{array}{c}
      d_{1t} \\ 0
      \end{array} } 
      \right] = U_dz_t 

**Information**

.. math::

    z_{t+1} = 
   \left[ {\begin{array}{ccc}
      1 & 0 & 0 \\ 0 & 0.8 & 0 \\ 0 & 0 & 0.5 
      \end{array} } 
      \right]
      z_t + 
       \left[ {\begin{array}{cc}
      0 & 0 \\ 1 & 0 \\ 0 & 1
      \end{array} } 
      \right]
      w_{t+1} 

.. math::

    U_b = 
      \left[ {\begin{array}{ccc}
      30 & 0 & 0
      \end{array} } 
      \right]

.. math::

   U_d = 
      \left[ {\begin{array}{ccc}
      5 & 1 & 0 \\ 0 & 0 & 0
      \end{array} } 
      \right]

.. math::

   x_0 = 
      \left[ {\begin{array}{ccccc}
      5 & 150 & 1 & 0 & 0
      \end{array} } 
      \right]'

Asset Pricing Equations
========================

:cite:`HS2013` show that the time t value of a permanent claim to a stream
:math:`y_s = U_ax_s \, , s \geq t` is:

.. math::  a_t = (x_t'\mu_ax_t + \sigma_a)/(\bar e _1M_cx_t) 

with

.. math::  \mu_a = \sum_{\tau = 0}^\infty \beta^\tau(A^{o'})^\tau Z_a A^{o\tau} 

.. math::  \sigma_a = \frac{\beta}{1-\beta} \text{trace} (Z_a \sum_{\tau = 0}^\infty \beta^\tau (A^{o})^\tau C C^{'} (A^{o'})^\tau)

where

.. math::  Z_a = U_a^{'}M_c 

The use of :math:`\bar e _1` indicates that the first consumption good
is the numeraire

Asset Pricing Simulations
==========================

.. code-block:: python3

    gam = 0
    γ = np.array([[gam], [0]])
    ϕ_c = np.array([[1], [0]])
    ϕ_g = np.array([[0], [1]])
    ϕ_1 = 1e-4
    ϕ_i = np.array([[0], [-ϕ_1]])
    δ_k = np.array([[.95]])
    θ_k = np.array([[1]])
    β = np.array([[1 / 1.05]])
    ud = np.array([[5, 1, 0], 
                   [0, 0, 0]])
    a22 = np.array([[1,   0,    0], 
                    [0, 0.8,    0], 
                    [0,   0, 0.5]])
    c2 = np.array([[0, 1, 0],
                   [0, 0, 1]]).T
    l_λ = np.array([[0]])
    π_h = np.array([[1]])
    δ_h = np.array([[.9]])
    θ_h = np.array([[1]]) - δ_h
    ub = np.array([[30, 0, 0]])
    x0 = np.array([[5, 150, 1, 0, 0]]).T
    
    Info1 = (a22, c2, ub, ud)
    Tech1 = (ϕ_c, ϕ_g, ϕ_i, γ, δ_k, θ_k)
    Pref1 = (β, l_λ, π_h, δ_h, θ_h)

.. code-block:: python3

    Econ1 = DLE(Info1, Tech1, Pref1)

After specifying a "Pay" matrix, we simulate the economy

The particular choice of "Pay" used below means that we are pricing a
perpetual claim on the endowment process :math:`d_{1t}`

.. code-block:: python3

    Econ1.compute_sequence(x0, ts_length=100, Pay=np.array([Econ1.Sd[0, :]]))

The graph below plots the price of this claim over time:

.. code-block:: python3

    ### Fig 7.12.1 from p.147 of HS2013
    plt.plot(Econ1.Pay_Price, label='Price of Tree')
    plt.legend()
    plt.show()

The next plot displays the realized gross rate of return on this "Lucas
tree" as well as on a risk-free one-period bond:

.. code-block:: python3

    ### Left panel of Fig 7.12.2 from p.148 of HS2013
    plt.plot(Econ1.Pay_Gross, label='Tree')
    plt.plot(Econ1.R1_Gross, label='Risk-Free')
    plt.legend()
    plt.show()

.. code-block:: python3

    np.corrcoef(Econ1.Pay_Gross[1:, 0], Econ1.R1_Gross[1:, 0])


Above we have also calculated the correlation coefficient between these
two returns

To give an idea of how the term structure of interest rates moves in
this economy, the next plot displays the *net* rates of return on
one-period and five-period risk-free bonds:

.. code-block:: python3

    ### Right panel of Fig 7.12.2 from p.148 of HS2013
    plt.plot(Econ1.R1_Net, label='One-Period')
    plt.plot(Econ1.R5_Net, label='Five-Period')
    plt.legend()
    plt.show()

From the above plot, we can see the tendency of the term structure to
slope up when rates are low, and to slope down when rates are high

Comparing it to the previous plot of the price of the "Lucas tree", we
can also see that net rates of return are low when the price of the tree
is high, and vice versa

We now plot the realized gross rate of return on a "Lucas tree" as well
as on a risk-free one-period bond when the autoregressive parameter for
the endowment process is reduced to 0.4:

.. code-block:: python3

    a22_2 = np.array([[1,   0,   0], 
                      [0, 0.4,   0],
                      [0,   0, 0.5]])
    Info2 = (a22_2, c2, ub, ud)
    
    Econ2 = DLE(Info2, Tech1, Pref1)
    Econ2.compute_sequence(x0, ts_length=100, Pay=np.array([Econ2.Sd[0, :]]))

.. code-block:: python3

    ### Left panel of Fig 7.12.3 from p.148 of HS2013
    plt.plot(Econ2.Pay_Gross, label='Tree')
    plt.plot(Econ2.R1_Gross, label='Risk-Free')
    plt.legend()
    plt.show()

.. code-block:: python3

    np.corrcoef(Econ2.Pay_Gross[1:, 0], Econ2.R1_Gross[1:, 0])


The correlation between these two gross rates is now more negative

Next, we again plot the *net* rates of return on one-period and
five-period risk-free bonds:

.. code-block:: python3

    ### Right panel of Fig 7.12.3 from p.148 of HS2013
    plt.plot(Econ2.R1_Net, label='One-Period')
    plt.plot(Econ2.R5_Net, label='Five-Period')
    plt.legend()
    plt.show()

We can see the tendency of the term structure to slope up when rates are
low (and down when rates are high) has been accentuated relative to the
first instance of our economy

Commit message:

Tom's April 30 edits of 8 or so sandpit lectures

source/rst/lucas_asset_pricing_dles.rst, after:

.. _lucas_asset_pricing_dles:

.. include:: /_static/includes/lecture_howto_py.raw

.. index::
    single: python

******************************
Lucas Asset Pricing Using DLE
******************************

.. contents:: :depth: 2

**Co-author:** Sebastian Graves


This is one of a suite of lectures that use the quantecon DLE class to instantiate models within the
:cite:`HS2013` class of models described in detail in :doc:`Recursive Models of Dynamic Linear Economies<HS_recursive_models>`


In addition to what's in Anaconda, this lecture uses the quantecon  library

.. code-block:: ipython
  :class: hide-output

  !pip install quantecon

This lecture uses  the DLE class to price payout
streams that are linear functions of the economy's state vector, as well
as risk-free assets that pay out one unit of the first consumption good
with certainty

We assume basic knowledge of the class of economic environments that fall within the domain of the
DLE class

Many details about the basic environment are contained in the lecture
:doc:`Growth in Dynamic Linear Economies <growth_in_dles>`

We'll also need the following imports

.. code-block:: ipython

    import numpy as np
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
    from quantecon import LQ
    from quantecon import DLE
    %matplotlib inline

We use a linear-quadratic version of an economy that Lucas (1978) :cite:`Lucas1978` used
to develop an equilibrium theory of asset prices:

**Preferences**

.. math::  -\frac{1}{2}\mathbb{E}\sum_{t=0}^\infty \beta^t[(c_t - b_t)^2 + l_t^2]|J_0 

.. math:: s_t = c_t

.. math:: b_t = U_bz_t

**Technology**

.. math::  c_t = d_{1t} 

.. math::  k_t = \delta_k k_{t-1} + i_t 

.. math::  g_t = \phi_1 i_t \, , \phi_1 > 0 

.. math::

    \left[ {\begin{array}{c}
      d_{1t} \\ 0
      \end{array} } 
      \right] = U_dz_t 

**Information**

.. math::

    z_{t+1} = 
   \left[ {\begin{array}{ccc}
      1 & 0 & 0 \\ 0 & 0.8 & 0 \\ 0 & 0 & 0.5 
      \end{array} } 
      \right]
      z_t + 
       \left[ {\begin{array}{cc}
      0 & 0 \\ 1 & 0 \\ 0 & 1
      \end{array} } 
      \right]
      w_{t+1} 

.. math::

    U_b = 
      \left[ {\begin{array}{ccc}
      30 & 0 & 0
      \end{array} } 
      \right]

.. math::

   U_d = 
      \left[ {\begin{array}{ccc}
      5 & 1 & 0 \\ 0 & 0 & 0
      \end{array} } 
      \right]

.. math::

   x_0 = 
      \left[ {\begin{array}{ccccc}
      5 & 150 & 1 & 0 & 0
      \end{array} } 
      \right]'

Asset Pricing Equations
========================

:cite:`HS2013` show that the time t value of a permanent claim to a stream
:math:`y_s = U_ax_s \, , s \geq t` is:

.. math::  a_t = (x_t'\mu_ax_t + \sigma_a)/(\bar e _1M_cx_t) 

with

.. math::  \mu_a = \sum_{\tau = 0}^\infty \beta^\tau(A^{o'})^\tau Z_a A^{o\tau} 

.. math::  \sigma_a = \frac{\beta}{1-\beta} \text{trace} (Z_a \sum_{\tau = 0}^\infty \beta^\tau (A^{o})^\tau C C^{'} (A^{o'})^\tau)

where

.. math::  Z_a = U_a^{'}M_c 

The use of :math:`\bar e _1` indicates that the first consumption good
is the numeraire

Asset Pricing Simulations
==========================

.. code-block:: python3

    gam = 0
    γ = np.array([[gam], [0]])
    ϕ_c = np.array([[1], [0]])
    ϕ_g = np.array([[0], [1]])
    ϕ_1 = 1e-4
    ϕ_i = np.array([[0], [-ϕ_1]])
    δ_k = np.array([[.95]])
    θ_k = np.array([[1]])
    β = np.array([[1 / 1.05]])
    ud = np.array([[5, 1, 0], 
                   [0, 0, 0]])
    a22 = np.array([[1,   0,    0], 
                    [0, 0.8,    0], 
                    [0,   0, 0.5]])
    c2 = np.array([[0, 1, 0],
                   [0, 0, 1]]).T
    l_λ = np.array([[0]])
    π_h = np.array([[1]])
    δ_h = np.array([[.9]])
    θ_h = np.array([[1]]) - δ_h
    ub = np.array([[30, 0, 0]])
    x0 = np.array([[5, 150, 1, 0, 0]]).T
    
    Info1 = (a22, c2, ub, ud)
    Tech1 = (ϕ_c, ϕ_g, ϕ_i, γ, δ_k, θ_k)
    Pref1 = (β, l_λ, π_h, δ_h, θ_h)

.. code-block:: python3

    Econ1 = DLE(Info1, Tech1, Pref1)

After specifying a "Pay" matrix, we simulate the economy

The particular choice of "Pay" used below means that we are pricing a
perpetual claim on the endowment process :math:`d_{1t}`

.. code-block:: python3

    Econ1.compute_sequence(x0, ts_length=100, Pay=np.array([Econ1.Sd[0, :]]))

The graph below plots the price of this claim over time:

.. code-block:: python3

    ### Fig 7.12.1 from p.147 of HS2013
    plt.plot(Econ1.Pay_Price, label='Price of Tree')
    plt.legend()
    plt.show()

The next plot displays the realized gross rate of return on this "Lucas
tree" as well as on a risk-free one-period bond:

.. code-block:: python3

    ### Left panel of Fig 7.12.2 from p.148 of HS2013
    plt.plot(Econ1.Pay_Gross, label='Tree')
    plt.plot(Econ1.R1_Gross, label='Risk-Free')
    plt.legend()
    plt.show()

.. code-block:: python3

    np.corrcoef(Econ1.Pay_Gross[1:, 0], Econ1.R1_Gross[1:, 0])


Above we have also calculated the correlation coefficient between these
two returns

To give an idea of how the term structure of interest rates moves in
this economy, the next plot displays the *net* rates of return on
one-period and five-period risk-free bonds:

.. code-block:: python3

    ### Right panel of Fig 7.12.2 from p.148 of HS2013
    plt.plot(Econ1.R1_Net, label='One-Period')
    plt.plot(Econ1.R5_Net, label='Five-Period')
    plt.legend()
    plt.show()

From the above plot, we can see the tendency of the term structure to
slope up when rates are low, and to slope down when rates are high

Comparing it to the previous plot of the price of the "Lucas tree", we
can also see that net rates of return are low when the price of the tree
is high, and vice versa

We now plot the realized gross rate of return on a "Lucas tree" as well
as on a risk-free one-period bond when the autoregressive parameter for
the endowment process is reduced to 0.4:

.. code-block:: python3

    a22_2 = np.array([[1,   0,   0], 
                      [0, 0.4,   0],
                      [0,   0, 0.5]])
    Info2 = (a22_2, c2, ub, ud)
    
    Econ2 = DLE(Info2, Tech1, Pref1)
    Econ2.compute_sequence(x0, ts_length=100, Pay=np.array([Econ2.Sd[0, :]]))

.. code-block:: python3

    ### Left panel of Fig 7.12.3 from p.148 of HS2013
    plt.plot(Econ2.Pay_Gross, label='Tree')
    plt.plot(Econ2.R1_Gross, label='Risk-Free')
    plt.legend()
    plt.show()

.. code-block:: python3

    np.corrcoef(Econ2.Pay_Gross[1:, 0], Econ2.R1_Gross[1:, 0])


The correlation between these two gross rates is now more negative

Next, we again plot the *net* rates of return on one-period and
five-period risk-free bonds:

.. code-block:: python3

    ### Right panel of Fig 7.12.3 from p.148 of HS2013
    plt.plot(Econ2.R1_Net, label='One-Period')
    plt.plot(Econ2.R5_Net, label='Five-Period')
    plt.legend()
    plt.show()

We can see the tendency of the term structure to slope up when rates are
low (and down when rates are high) has been accentuated relative to the
first instance of our economy
