source/rst/permanent_income_dles.rst, before:

.. _permanent_income_dles:

.. include:: /_static/includes/lecture_howto_py.raw

.. index::
    single: python

********************************************************
Permanent Income Model using the DLE class
********************************************************

.. contents:: :depth: 2

**Co-author:** Sebastian Graves

In addition to what's included in  Anaconda, this lecture uses the quantecon  library

.. code-block:: ipython
  :class: hide-output

  !pip install quantecon


This lecture adds a third solution method for the
linear-quadratic-Gaussian permanent income model with
:math:`\beta R = 1`, complementing the other two solution methods described in in 
:doc:`Optimal Savings I: The Permanent Income Model <perm_income>` and
:doc:`Optimal Savings II: LQ Techniques <perm_income_cons>` and this Jupyter
notebook `<http://nbviewer.jupyter.org/github/QuantEcon/QuantEcon.notebooks/blob/master/permanent_income.ipynb>`__



The additional solution method uses the **DLE** class

In this way, we  map the permanent
income model into the framework of Hansen & Sargent (2013) "Recursive
Models of Dynamic Linear Economies" :cite:`HS2013`

We'll also require the following imports

.. code-block:: ipython

    import quantecon as qe
    import numpy as np
    import scipy.linalg as la
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
    from quantecon import DLE
    
    %matplotlib inline
    np.set_printoptions(suppress=True, precision=4)

The Permanent Income Model
===========================

The LQ permanent income model is an example of a **savings problem**

A consumer has preferences over consumption streams that are ordered by
the utility functional

.. math::
    :label: utility
  
    E_0 \sum_{t=0}^\infty \beta^t u(c_t)

where :math:`E_t` is the mathematical expectation conditioned on the
consumer's time :math:`t` information, :math:`c_t` is time :math:`t`
consumption, :math:`u(c)` is a strictly concave one-period utility
function, and :math:`\beta \in (0,1)` is a discount factor

The LQ model gets its name partly from assuming that the utility
function :math:`u` is quadratic:

.. math::  u(c) = -.5(c - \gamma)^2 

where :math:`\gamma>0` is a bliss level of consumption

The consumer maximizes the utility functional :eq:`utility` by choosing a
consumption, borrowing plan :math:`\{c_t, b_{t+1}\}_{t=0}^\infty`
subject to the sequence of budget constraints

.. math::  
  :label: max-utility
  
  c_t + b_t = R^{-1} b_{t+1}  + y_t, t \geq 0

where :math:`y_t` is an exogenous stationary endowment process,
:math:`R` is a constant gross risk-free interest rate, :math:`b_t` is
one-period risk-free debt maturing at :math:`t`, and :math:`b_0` is a
given initial condition

We shall assume that :math:`R^{-1} = \beta`

Equation :eq:`max-utility` is linear

We use another set of linear equations to model the endowment process

In particular, we assume that the endowment process has the state-space
representation

.. math::
    :label: endowment

    \eqalign{ z_{t+1} & = A_{22} z_t + C_2 w_{t+1}  \cr
                  y_t & = U_y  z_t  \cr}

where :math:`w_{t+1}` is an i.i.d. process with mean zero and identity
contemporaneous covariance matrix, :math:`A_{22}` is a stable matrix,
its eigenvalues being strictly below unity in modulus, and :math:`U_y`
is a selection vector that identifies :math:`y` with a particular linear
combination of the :math:`z_t`

We impose the following condition on the consumption, borrowing plan:

.. math::  
  :label: contraint
  
  E_0 \sum_{t=0}^\infty \beta^t b_t^2 < +\infty

This condition suffices to rule out Ponzi schemes

(We impose this condition to rule out a borrow-more-and-more plan that
would allow the household to enjoy bliss consumption forever)

The state vector confronting the household at :math:`t` is

.. math::  x_t = \left[\matrix{z_t \cr b_t\cr}\right]

where :math:`b_t` is its one-period debt falling due at the beginning of
period :math:`t` and :math:`z_t` contains all variables useful for
forecasting its future endowment

We assume that :math:`\{y_t\}` follows a second order univariate
autoregressive process:

.. math::  y_{t+1} = \alpha + \rho_1 y_t + \rho_2 y_{t-1} + \sigma w_{t+1} 

Solution with the DLE class
----------------------------

One way of solving this model is to map the problem into the framework
outlined in Section 4.8 of :cite:`HS2013` by setting up our technology,
information and preference matrices as follows:

**Technology:**
:math:`\phi_c=  \left[ {\begin{array}{c}  1 \\ 0  \end{array} }  \right]`
,
:math:`\phi_g=  \left[ {\begin{array}{c}  0 \\ 1  \end{array} }  \right]`
,
:math:`\phi_i=  \left[ {\begin{array}{c}  -1 \\ -0.00001  \end{array} }  \right]`,
:math:`\Gamma=  \left[ {\begin{array}{c}  -1 \\ 0  \end{array} }  \right]`,
:math:`\Delta_k = 0`,  :math:`\Theta_k = R`

**Information:**
:math:`A_{22} = \left[ {\begin{array}{ccc}  1 & 0 & 0 \\ \alpha & \rho_1 & \rho_2 \\ 0 & 1 & 0  \end{array} }  \right]`,
:math:`C_{2} = \left[ {\begin{array}{c}  0 \\ \sigma \\ 0  \end{array} }  \right]`,
:math:`U_b = \left[ {\begin{array}{ccc}  \gamma & 0 & 0  \end{array} }  \right]`,
:math:`U_d = \left[ {\begin{array}{ccc}  0 & 1 & 0 \\ 0 & 0 & 0  \end{array} }  \right]`

**Preferences:** :math:`\Lambda = 0`, :math:`\Pi = 1`,
:math:`\Delta_h = 0`, :math:`\Theta_h = 0`

We set parameters

:math:`\alpha = 10, \beta = 0.95, \rho_1 = 0.9, \rho_2 = 0, \sigma = 1`

(The value of :math:`\gamma` does not affect the optimal decision rule)

The chosen matrices mean that the household's technology is:

.. math::  c_t + k_{t-1} = i_t + y_t

.. math:: \frac{k_t}{R} = i_t

.. math::  l_t^2 = (0.00001)^2i_t 

Combining the first two of these gives the budget constraint of the
permanent income model, where :math:`k_t = b_{t+1}`

The third equation is a very small penalty on debt-accumulation to rule
out Ponzi schemes

We set up this instance of the DLE class below:

.. code-block:: python3

    α, β, ρ_1, ρ_2, σ = 10, 0.95, 0.9, 0, 1
    
    γ = np.array([[-1], [0]])
    ϕ_c = np.array([[1], [0]])
    ϕ_g = np.array([[0], [1]])
    ϕ_1 = 1e-5
    ϕ_i = np.array([[-1], [-ϕ_1]])
    δ_k = np.array([[0]])
    θ_k = np.array([[1 / β]])
    β = np.array([[β]])
    l_λ = np.array([[0]])
    π_h = np.array([[1]])
    δ_h = np.array([[0]])
    θ_h = np.array([[0]])
    
    a22 = np.array([[1,   0,   0], 
                    [α, ρ_1, ρ_2], 
                    [0, 1, 0]])
                    
    c2 = np.array([[0], [σ], [0]])
    ud = np.array([[0, 1, 0], 
                   [0, 0, 0]])
    ub = np.array([[100, 0, 0]])
    
    x0 = np.array([[0], [0], [1], [0], [0]])
    
    Info1 = (a22, c2, ub, ud)
    Tech1 = (ϕ_c, ϕ_g, ϕ_i, γ, δ_k, θ_k)
    Pref1 = (β, l_λ, π_h, δ_h, θ_h)
    Econ1 = DLE(Info1, Tech1, Pref1)

To check the solution of this model with that from the **LQ** problem,
we select the :math:`S_c` matrix from the DLE class

The solution to the
DLE economy has:

.. math:: c_t = S_c x_t

.. code-block:: python3

    Econ1.Sc

The state vector in the DLE class is:

.. math::

     x_t = \left[ {\begin{array}{c}
      h_{t-1} \\ k_{t-1} \\ z_t
      \end{array} }
      \right]

where :math:`k_{t-1}` = :math:`b_{t}` is set up to be :math:`b_t` in the
permanent income model

The state vector in the LQ problem is
:math:`\left[\matrix{z_t \cr b_t\cr}\right]`

Consequently, the relevant elements of Econ1.Sc are the same as in
:math:`-F` occur when we apply other approaches to the same model in the lecture 
:doc:`Optimal Savings II: LQ Techniques <perm_income_cons>` and this Jupyter
notebook `<http://nbviewer.jupyter.org/github/QuantEcon/QuantEcon.notebooks/blob/master/permanent_income.ipynb>`__


The plot below quickly replicates the first two figures of 
that that lecture and that  notebook to confirm that the solutions are the same

.. code-block:: python3

    plt.figure(figsize=(16, 5))
    plt.subplot(121)
    
    for i in range(25):
        Econ1.compute_sequence(x0, ts_length=150)
        plt.plot(Econ1.c[0], c='g')
        plt.plot(Econ1.d[0], c='b')
    plt.plot(Econ1.c[0], label='Consumption', c='g')
    plt.plot(Econ1.d[0], label='Income', c='b')
    plt.legend()
    
    plt.subplot(122)
    for i in range(25):
        Econ1.compute_sequence(x0, ts_length=150)
        plt.plot(Econ1.k[0], color='r')
    plt.plot(Econ1.k[0], label='Debt', c='r')
    plt.legend()
    plt.show()

Commit message:

Tom's April 30 edits of 8 or so sandpit lectures

source/rst/permanent_income_dles.rst, after:

.. _permanent_income_dles:

.. include:: /_static/includes/lecture_howto_py.raw

.. index::
    single: python

********************************************************
Permanent Income Model using the DLE class
********************************************************

.. contents:: :depth: 2

**Co-author:** Sebastian Graves


This lecture is part of a suite of lectures that use the quantecon DLE class to instantiate models within the
:cite:`HS2013` class of models described in detail in :doc:`Recursive Models of Dynamic Linear Economies<HS_recursive_models>`

In addition to what's included in  Anaconda, this lecture uses the quantecon  library

.. code-block:: ipython
  :class: hide-output

  !pip install quantecon


This lecture adds a third solution method for the
linear-quadratic-Gaussian permanent income model with
:math:`\beta R = 1`, complementing the other two solution methods described in in 
:doc:`Optimal Savings I: The Permanent Income Model <perm_income>` and
:doc:`Optimal Savings II: LQ Techniques <perm_income_cons>` and this Jupyter
notebook `<http://nbviewer.jupyter.org/github/QuantEcon/QuantEcon.notebooks/blob/master/permanent_income.ipynb>`__



The additional solution method uses the **DLE** class

In this way, we  map the permanent
income model into the framework of Hansen & Sargent (2013) "Recursive
Models of Dynamic Linear Economies" :cite:`HS2013`

We'll also require the following imports

.. code-block:: ipython

    import quantecon as qe
    import numpy as np
    import scipy.linalg as la
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
    from quantecon import DLE
    
    %matplotlib inline
    np.set_printoptions(suppress=True, precision=4)

The Permanent Income Model
===========================

The LQ permanent income model is an example of a **savings problem**

A consumer has preferences over consumption streams that are ordered by
the utility functional

.. math::
    :label: utility
  
    E_0 \sum_{t=0}^\infty \beta^t u(c_t)

where :math:`E_t` is the mathematical expectation conditioned on the
consumer's time :math:`t` information, :math:`c_t` is time :math:`t`
consumption, :math:`u(c)` is a strictly concave one-period utility
function, and :math:`\beta \in (0,1)` is a discount factor

The LQ model gets its name partly from assuming that the utility
function :math:`u` is quadratic:

.. math::  u(c) = -.5(c - \gamma)^2 

where :math:`\gamma>0` is a bliss level of consumption

The consumer maximizes the utility functional :eq:`utility` by choosing a
consumption, borrowing plan :math:`\{c_t, b_{t+1}\}_{t=0}^\infty`
subject to the sequence of budget constraints

.. math::  
  :label: max-utility
  
  c_t + b_t = R^{-1} b_{t+1}  + y_t, t \geq 0

where :math:`y_t` is an exogenous stationary endowment process,
:math:`R` is a constant gross risk-free interest rate, :math:`b_t` is
one-period risk-free debt maturing at :math:`t`, and :math:`b_0` is a
given initial condition

We shall assume that :math:`R^{-1} = \beta`

Equation :eq:`max-utility` is linear

We use another set of linear equations to model the endowment process

In particular, we assume that the endowment process has the state-space
representation

.. math::
    :label: endowment

    \eqalign{ z_{t+1} & = A_{22} z_t + C_2 w_{t+1}  \cr
                  y_t & = U_y  z_t  \cr}

where :math:`w_{t+1}` is an i.i.d. process with mean zero and identity
contemporaneous covariance matrix, :math:`A_{22}` is a stable matrix,
its eigenvalues being strictly below unity in modulus, and :math:`U_y`
is a selection vector that identifies :math:`y` with a particular linear
combination of the :math:`z_t`

We impose the following condition on the consumption, borrowing plan:

.. math::  
  :label: contraint
  
  E_0 \sum_{t=0}^\infty \beta^t b_t^2 < +\infty

This condition suffices to rule out Ponzi schemes

(We impose this condition to rule out a borrow-more-and-more plan that
would allow the household to enjoy bliss consumption forever)

The state vector confronting the household at :math:`t` is

.. math::  x_t = \left[\matrix{z_t \cr b_t\cr}\right]

where :math:`b_t` is its one-period debt falling due at the beginning of
period :math:`t` and :math:`z_t` contains all variables useful for
forecasting its future endowment

We assume that :math:`\{y_t\}` follows a second order univariate
autoregressive process:

.. math::  y_{t+1} = \alpha + \rho_1 y_t + \rho_2 y_{t-1} + \sigma w_{t+1} 

Solution with the DLE class
----------------------------

One way of solving this model is to map the problem into the framework
outlined in Section 4.8 of :cite:`HS2013` by setting up our technology,
information and preference matrices as follows:

**Technology:**
:math:`\phi_c=  \left[ {\begin{array}{c}  1 \\ 0  \end{array} }  \right]`
,
:math:`\phi_g=  \left[ {\begin{array}{c}  0 \\ 1  \end{array} }  \right]`
,
:math:`\phi_i=  \left[ {\begin{array}{c}  -1 \\ -0.00001  \end{array} }  \right]`,
:math:`\Gamma=  \left[ {\begin{array}{c}  -1 \\ 0  \end{array} }  \right]`,
:math:`\Delta_k = 0`,  :math:`\Theta_k = R`

**Information:**
:math:`A_{22} = \left[ {\begin{array}{ccc}  1 & 0 & 0 \\ \alpha & \rho_1 & \rho_2 \\ 0 & 1 & 0  \end{array} }  \right]`,
:math:`C_{2} = \left[ {\begin{array}{c}  0 \\ \sigma \\ 0  \end{array} }  \right]`,
:math:`U_b = \left[ {\begin{array}{ccc}  \gamma & 0 & 0  \end{array} }  \right]`,
:math:`U_d = \left[ {\begin{array}{ccc}  0 & 1 & 0 \\ 0 & 0 & 0  \end{array} }  \right]`

**Preferences:** :math:`\Lambda = 0`, :math:`\Pi = 1`,
:math:`\Delta_h = 0`, :math:`\Theta_h = 0`

We set parameters

:math:`\alpha = 10, \beta = 0.95, \rho_1 = 0.9, \rho_2 = 0, \sigma = 1`

(The value of :math:`\gamma` does not affect the optimal decision rule)

The chosen matrices mean that the household's technology is:

.. math::  c_t + k_{t-1} = i_t + y_t

.. math:: \frac{k_t}{R} = i_t

.. math::  l_t^2 = (0.00001)^2i_t 

Combining the first two of these gives the budget constraint of the
permanent income model, where :math:`k_t = b_{t+1}`

The third equation is a very small penalty on debt-accumulation to rule
out Ponzi schemes

We set up this instance of the DLE class below:

.. code-block:: python3

    α, β, ρ_1, ρ_2, σ = 10, 0.95, 0.9, 0, 1
    
    γ = np.array([[-1], [0]])
    ϕ_c = np.array([[1], [0]])
    ϕ_g = np.array([[0], [1]])
    ϕ_1 = 1e-5
    ϕ_i = np.array([[-1], [-ϕ_1]])
    δ_k = np.array([[0]])
    θ_k = np.array([[1 / β]])
    β = np.array([[β]])
    l_λ = np.array([[0]])
    π_h = np.array([[1]])
    δ_h = np.array([[0]])
    θ_h = np.array([[0]])
    
    a22 = np.array([[1,   0,   0], 
                    [α, ρ_1, ρ_2], 
                    [0, 1, 0]])
                    
    c2 = np.array([[0], [σ], [0]])
    ud = np.array([[0, 1, 0], 
                   [0, 0, 0]])
    ub = np.array([[100, 0, 0]])
    
    x0 = np.array([[0], [0], [1], [0], [0]])
    
    Info1 = (a22, c2, ub, ud)
    Tech1 = (ϕ_c, ϕ_g, ϕ_i, γ, δ_k, θ_k)
    Pref1 = (β, l_λ, π_h, δ_h, θ_h)
    Econ1 = DLE(Info1, Tech1, Pref1)

To check the solution of this model with that from the **LQ** problem,
we select the :math:`S_c` matrix from the DLE class

The solution to the
DLE economy has:

.. math:: c_t = S_c x_t

.. code-block:: python3

    Econ1.Sc

The state vector in the DLE class is:

.. math::

     x_t = \left[ {\begin{array}{c}
      h_{t-1} \\ k_{t-1} \\ z_t
      \end{array} }
      \right]

where :math:`k_{t-1}` = :math:`b_{t}` is set up to be :math:`b_t` in the
permanent income model

The state vector in the LQ problem is
:math:`\left[\matrix{z_t \cr b_t\cr}\right]`

Consequently, the relevant elements of Econ1.Sc are the same as in
:math:`-F` occur when we apply other approaches to the same model in the lecture 
:doc:`Optimal Savings II: LQ Techniques <perm_income_cons>` and this Jupyter
notebook `<http://nbviewer.jupyter.org/github/QuantEcon/QuantEcon.notebooks/blob/master/permanent_income.ipynb>`__


The plot below quickly replicates the first two figures of 
that that lecture and that  notebook to confirm that the solutions are the same

.. code-block:: python3

    plt.figure(figsize=(16, 5))
    plt.subplot(121)
    
    for i in range(25):
        Econ1.compute_sequence(x0, ts_length=150)
        plt.plot(Econ1.c[0], c='g')
        plt.plot(Econ1.d[0], c='b')
    plt.plot(Econ1.c[0], label='Consumption', c='g')
    plt.plot(Econ1.d[0], label='Income', c='b')
    plt.legend()
    
    plt.subplot(122)
    for i in range(25):
        Econ1.compute_sequence(x0, ts_length=150)
        plt.plot(Econ1.k[0], color='r')
    plt.plot(Econ1.k[0], label='Debt', c='r')
    plt.legend()
    plt.show()
