source/rst/rosen_schooling_model.rst, before:

.. _rosen_schooling_model:

.. include:: /_static/includes/lecture_howto_py.raw

.. index::
    single: python

****************************
Rosen schooling model
****************************

.. contents:: :depth: 2

**Co-author:** Sebastian Graves

In addition to what's included in  Anaconda, this lecture uses the quantecon  library

.. code-block:: ipython
  :class: hide-output

  !pip install quantecon

We'll also need the following imports

.. code-block:: ipython

    import numpy as np
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
    from quantecon import LQ
    from collections import namedtuple
    from quantecon import DLE
    from math import sqrt
    %matplotlib inline

A One-Occupation Model
========================

Ryoo and Rosen's (2004) :cite:`ryoo2004engineering` partial equilibrium model determines

-  a stock of "Engineers" :math:`N_t`

-  a number of new entrants in engineering school, :math:`n_t`

-  the wage rate of engineers, :math:`w_t`

It takes k periods of schooling to become an engineer

The model consists of the following equations:

-  a demand curve for engineers:

.. math:: w_t = - \alpha_d N_t + \epsilon_{dt} 

-  a time-to-build structure of the education process:

.. math::  N_{t+k} = \delta_N N_{t+k-1} + n_t 

-  a definition of the discounted present value of each new engineering
   student:

.. math::  v_t = \beta_k \mathbb{E} \sum_{j=0}^\infty (\beta \delta_N)^j w_{t+k+j}

-  a supply curve of new students driven by present value :math:`v_t`:

.. math:: n_t = \\alpha_s v_t + \epsilon_{st} 

Mapping into HS2013 framework
===============================================

We represent this model in the :cite:`HS2013` framework by

-  sweeping the time-to-build structure and the demand for engineers
   into the household technology, and

-  putting the supply of engineers into the technology for producing
   goods

Preferences
============

.. math::

    \Pi = 0, \Lambda= 
   \left[ {\begin{array}{ccccc}
      \alpha_d & 0 & \cdots & 0 
      \end{array} } 
      \right]
   , \Delta_h = 
   \left[ {\begin{array}{ccccc}
      \delta_N & 1 & 0 & \cdots & 0 \\ 0 & 0 & 1 & \cdots & 0 \\ \vdots & \vdots & \vdots & \ddots & \vdots \\ 0 & \cdots& \cdots & 0 & 1 \\ 0 & 0 & 0 & \cdots & 0 
      \end{array} } 
      \right]
      , \Theta_h = 
   \left[ {\begin{array}{c}
      0 \\ 0 \\ \vdots \\ 0 \\ 1
      \end{array} } 
      \right] 

where :math:`\Lambda` is a k+1 x 1 matrix, :math:`\Delta_h` is a k\_1 x
k+1 matrix, and :math:`\Theta_h` is a k+1 x 1 matrix

This specification sets :math:`N_t = h_{1t-1}`, :math:`n_t = c_t`,
:math:`h_{\tau+1,t-1} = n_{t-(k-\tau)}` for :math:`\tau = 1,...,k`

Below we set things up so that the number of years of education, k, can
be varied

Technology
===========

To capture Ryoo and Rosen's :cite:`ryoo2004engineering` supply curve, we use the physical
technology:

.. math::  c_t = i_t + d_{1t} 

.. math::  \psi_1i_t = g_t 

where :math:`\psi_1` is inversely proportional to :math:`\alpha_s`

Information
============

Because we  want :math:`b_t = \epsilon_{dt}` and :math:`d_{1t} =\epsilon_{st}`, we set
 

.. math::

    A_{22}= 
   \left[ {\begin{array}{ccc}
      1 & 0 & 0 \\ 0 & \rho_s & 0 \\ 0 & 0 & \rho_d
      \end{array} } 
      \right] \
   ,   C_2 = 
   \left[ {\begin{array}{ccc}
      0 & 0 \\ 1 & 0 \\ 0 & 1
      \end{array} } 
      \right] \
   ,   U_b = 
   \left[ {\begin{array}{cccc}
      30 & 0 & 1
      \end{array} } 
      \right] \
   ,   U_d = 
   \left[ {\begin{array}{c}
      10 & 1 & 0 \\ 0 & 0 & 0
      \end{array} } 
      \right] \

where :math:`\rho_s` and :math:`\rho_d` describe the persistence of the
supply and demand shocks

.. code-block:: python3

    Information = namedtuple('Information', ['a22', 'c2','ub','ud'])
    Technology = namedtuple('Technology', ['ϕ_c', 'ϕ_g', 'ϕ_i', 'γ', 'δ_k', 'θ_k'])
    Preferences = namedtuple('Preferences', ['β', 'l_λ', 'π_h', 'δ_h', 'θ_h'])

Effects of changes in education technology and demand
-----------------------------------------------------

We now study how changing

-  the number of years of education required to become an engineer and

-  the slope of the demand curve

affects responses to demand shocks

To begin, we set :math:`k = 4` and :math:`\alpha_d = 0.1`

.. code-block:: python3

    k = 4  # Number of periods of schooling required to become engineer
    
    β = np.array([[1 / 1.05]])
    α_d = np.array([[0.1]])
    α_s = 1
    ε_1 = 1e-7
    λ_1 = np.ones((1, k)) * ε_1
    l_λ = np.hstack((α_d, λ_1))  # Use of ε_1 is trick to aquire detectability, see HS2013 p. 228 footnote 4
    π_h = np.array([[0]])
    
    δ_n = np.array([[0.95]])
    d1 = np.vstack((δ_n, np.zeros((k - 1, 1))))
    d2 = np.hstack((d1, np.eye(k)))
    δ_h = np.vstack((d2, np.zeros((1, k + 1))))
    
    θ_h = np.vstack((np.zeros((k, 1)), 
                     np.ones((1, 1))))
    
    ψ_1 = 1 / α_s
    
    ϕ_c = np.array([[1], [0]])
    ϕ_g = np.array([[0], [-1]])
    ϕ_i = np.array([[-1], [ψ_1]])
    γ = np.array([[0], [0]])
    
    δ_k = np.array([[0]])
    θ_k = np.array([[0]])
    
    ρ_s = 0.8
    ρ_d = 0.8
    
    a22 = np.array([[1,   0,   0], 
                    [0, ρ_s,   0], 
                    [0,   0, ρ_d]])
                    
    c2 = np.array([[0, 0], [10, 0], [0, 10]])
    ub = np.array([[30, 0, 1]])
    ud = np.array([[10, 1, 0], [0, 0, 0]])
    
    Info1 = Information(a22, c2, ub, ud)
    Tech1 = Technology(ϕ_c, ϕ_g, ϕ_i, γ, δ_k, θ_k)
    Pref1 = Preferences(β, l_λ, π_h, δ_h, θ_h)
    
    Econ1 = DLE(Info1, Tech1, Pref1)

We create three other instances by:

1. Raising :math:`\alpha_d` to 2
2. Raising k to 7
3. Raising k to 10

.. code-block:: python3

    α_d = np.array([[2]])
    l_λ = np.hstack((α_d, λ_1))
    Pref2 = Preferences(β, l_λ, π_h, δ_h, θ_h)
    Econ2 = DLE(Info1, Tech1, Pref2)
    
    α_d = np.array([[0.1]])
    
    k = 7
    λ_1 = np.ones((1, k)) * ε_1
    l_λ = np.hstack((α_d, λ_1))
    d1 = np.vstack((δ_n, np.zeros((k - 1, 1))))
    d2 = np.hstack((d1, np.eye(k)))
    δ_h = np.vstack((d2, np.zeros((1, k+1))))
    θ_h = np.vstack((np.zeros((k, 1)), 
                     np.ones((1, 1))))
    
    Pref3 = Preferences(β, l_λ, π_h, δ_h, θ_h)
    Econ3 = DLE(Info1, Tech1, Pref3)
    
    k = 10
    λ_1 = np.ones((1, k)) * ε_1
    l_λ = np.hstack((α_d, λ_1))
    d1 = np.vstack((δ_n, np.zeros((k - 1, 1))))
    d2 = np.hstack((d1, np.eye(k)))
    δ_h = np.vstack((d2, np.zeros((1, k + 1))))
    θ_h = np.vstack((np.zeros((k, 1)), 
                     np.ones((1, 1))))
    
    Pref4 = Preferences(β, l_λ, π_h, δ_h, θ_h)
    Econ4 = DLE(Info1, Tech1, Pref4)

    shock_demand = np.array([[0], [1]])
    
    Econ1.irf(ts_length=25, shock=shock_demand)
    Econ2.irf(ts_length=25, shock=shock_demand)
    Econ3.irf(ts_length=25, shock=shock_demand)
    Econ4.irf(ts_length=25, shock=shock_demand)

The first figure plots the impulse response of :math:`n_t` (on the left)
and :math:`N_t` (on the right) to a positive demand shock, for
:math:`\alpha_d = 0.1` and :math:`\alpha_d = 2`

When :math:`\alpha_d = 2`, the number of new students :math:`n_t` rises
initially, but the response then turns negative

A positive demand shock raises wages, drawing new students into the
profession

However, these new students raise :math:`N_t`

The higher is :math:`\alpha_d`, the larger the effect of this rise in
:math:`N_t` on wages

This counteracts the demand shock's positive effect on wages, reducing
the number of new students in subsequent periods

Consequently, when :math:`\alpha_d` is lower, the effect of a demand
shock on :math:`N_t` is larger

.. code-block:: python3

    plt.figure(figsize=(12, 4))
    plt.subplot(121)
    plt.plot(Econ1.c_irf,label='$\\alpha_d = 0.1$')
    plt.plot(Econ2.c_irf,label='$\\alpha_d = 2$')
    plt.legend()
    plt.title('Response of $n_t$ to a demand shock')
    
    plt.subplot(122)
    plt.plot(Econ1.h_irf[:, 0], label='$\\alpha_d = 0.1$')
    plt.plot(Econ2.h_irf[:, 0], label='$\\alpha_d = 24$')
    plt.legend()
    plt.title('Response of $N_t$ to a demand shock')
    plt.show()

The next figure plots the impulse response of :math:`n_t` (on the left)
and :math:`N_t` (on the right) to a positive demand shock, for
:math:`k=4`, :math:`k=7` and :math:`k=10` (with :math:`\alpha_d = 0.1`)

.. code-block:: python3

    plt.figure(figsize=(12, 4))
    plt.subplot(121)
    plt.plot(Econ1.c_irf, label='$k=4$')
    plt.plot(Econ3.c_irf, label='$k=7$')
    plt.plot(Econ4.c_irf, label='$k=10$')
    plt.legend()
    plt.title('Response of $n_t$ to a demand shock')
    
    plt.subplot(122)
    plt.plot(Econ1.h_irf[:,0], label='$k=4$')
    plt.plot(Econ3.h_irf[:,0], label='$k=7$')
    plt.plot(Econ4.h_irf[:,0], label='$k=10$')
    plt.legend()
    plt.title('Response of $N_t$ to a demand shock')
    plt.show()


Both panels in the above figure show that raising k lowers the effect of
a positive demand shock on entry into the engineering profession

Increasing the number of periods of schooling lowers
the number of new students in response to a demand shock

This occurs because  with longer required schooling, new students ultimately benefit less from the impact of that shock on wages

Commit message:

Tom's April 30 edits of 8 or so sandpit lectures

source/rst/rosen_schooling_model.rst, after:

.. _rosen_schooling_model:

.. include:: /_static/includes/lecture_howto_py.raw

.. index::
    single: python

****************************
Rosen schooling model
****************************

.. contents:: :depth: 2

**Co-author:** Sebastian Graves


This lecture is yet another part of a suite of lectures that use the quantecon DLE class to instantiate models within the
:cite:`HS2013` class of models described in detail in :doc:`Recursive Models of Dynamic Linear Economies<HS_recursive_models>`

In addition to what's included in  Anaconda, this lecture uses the quantecon  library

.. code-block:: ipython
  :class: hide-output

  !pip install quantecon

We'll also need the following imports

.. code-block:: ipython

    import numpy as np
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
    from quantecon import LQ
    from collections import namedtuple
    from quantecon import DLE
    from math import sqrt
    %matplotlib inline

A One-Occupation Model
========================

Ryoo and Rosen's (2004) :cite:`ryoo2004engineering` partial equilibrium model determines

-  a stock of "Engineers" :math:`N_t`

-  a number of new entrants in engineering school, :math:`n_t`

-  the wage rate of engineers, :math:`w_t`

It takes k periods of schooling to become an engineer

The model consists of the following equations:

-  a demand curve for engineers:

.. math:: w_t = - \alpha_d N_t + \epsilon_{dt} 

-  a time-to-build structure of the education process:

.. math::  N_{t+k} = \delta_N N_{t+k-1} + n_t 

-  a definition of the discounted present value of each new engineering
   student:

.. math::  v_t = \beta_k \mathbb{E} \sum_{j=0}^\infty (\beta \delta_N)^j w_{t+k+j}

-  a supply curve of new students driven by present value :math:`v_t`:

.. math:: n_t = \\alpha_s v_t + \epsilon_{st} 

Mapping into HS2013 framework
===============================================

We represent this model in the :cite:`HS2013` framework by

-  sweeping the time-to-build structure and the demand for engineers
   into the household technology, and

-  putting the supply of engineers into the technology for producing
   goods

Preferences
============

.. math::

    \Pi = 0, \Lambda= 
   \left[ {\begin{array}{ccccc}
      \alpha_d & 0 & \cdots & 0 
      \end{array} } 
      \right]
   , \Delta_h = 
   \left[ {\begin{array}{ccccc}
      \delta_N & 1 & 0 & \cdots & 0 \\ 0 & 0 & 1 & \cdots & 0 \\ \vdots & \vdots & \vdots & \ddots & \vdots \\ 0 & \cdots& \cdots & 0 & 1 \\ 0 & 0 & 0 & \cdots & 0 
      \end{array} } 
      \right]
      , \Theta_h = 
   \left[ {\begin{array}{c}
      0 \\ 0 \\ \vdots \\ 0 \\ 1
      \end{array} } 
      \right] 

where :math:`\Lambda` is a k+1 x 1 matrix, :math:`\Delta_h` is a k\_1 x
k+1 matrix, and :math:`\Theta_h` is a k+1 x 1 matrix

This specification sets :math:`N_t = h_{1t-1}`, :math:`n_t = c_t`,
:math:`h_{\tau+1,t-1} = n_{t-(k-\tau)}` for :math:`\tau = 1,...,k`

Below we set things up so that the number of years of education, k, can
be varied

Technology
===========

To capture Ryoo and Rosen's :cite:`ryoo2004engineering` supply curve, we use the physical
technology:

.. math::  c_t = i_t + d_{1t} 

.. math::  \psi_1i_t = g_t 

where :math:`\psi_1` is inversely proportional to :math:`\alpha_s`

Information
============

Because we  want :math:`b_t = \epsilon_{dt}` and :math:`d_{1t} =\epsilon_{st}`, we set
 

.. math::

    A_{22}= 
   \left[ {\begin{array}{ccc}
      1 & 0 & 0 \\ 0 & \rho_s & 0 \\ 0 & 0 & \rho_d
      \end{array} } 
      \right] \
   ,   C_2 = 
   \left[ {\begin{array}{ccc}
      0 & 0 \\ 1 & 0 \\ 0 & 1
      \end{array} } 
      \right] \
   ,   U_b = 
   \left[ {\begin{array}{cccc}
      30 & 0 & 1
      \end{array} } 
      \right] \
   ,   U_d = 
   \left[ {\begin{array}{c}
      10 & 1 & 0 \\ 0 & 0 & 0
      \end{array} } 
      \right] \

where :math:`\rho_s` and :math:`\rho_d` describe the persistence of the
supply and demand shocks

.. code-block:: python3

    Information = namedtuple('Information', ['a22', 'c2','ub','ud'])
    Technology = namedtuple('Technology', ['ϕ_c', 'ϕ_g', 'ϕ_i', 'γ', 'δ_k', 'θ_k'])
    Preferences = namedtuple('Preferences', ['β', 'l_λ', 'π_h', 'δ_h', 'θ_h'])

Effects of changes in education technology and demand
-----------------------------------------------------

We now study how changing

-  the number of years of education required to become an engineer and

-  the slope of the demand curve

affects responses to demand shocks

To begin, we set :math:`k = 4` and :math:`\alpha_d = 0.1`

.. code-block:: python3

    k = 4  # Number of periods of schooling required to become engineer
    
    β = np.array([[1 / 1.05]])
    α_d = np.array([[0.1]])
    α_s = 1
    ε_1 = 1e-7
    λ_1 = np.ones((1, k)) * ε_1
    l_λ = np.hstack((α_d, λ_1))  # Use of ε_1 is trick to aquire detectability, see HS2013 p. 228 footnote 4
    π_h = np.array([[0]])
    
    δ_n = np.array([[0.95]])
    d1 = np.vstack((δ_n, np.zeros((k - 1, 1))))
    d2 = np.hstack((d1, np.eye(k)))
    δ_h = np.vstack((d2, np.zeros((1, k + 1))))
    
    θ_h = np.vstack((np.zeros((k, 1)), 
                     np.ones((1, 1))))
    
    ψ_1 = 1 / α_s
    
    ϕ_c = np.array([[1], [0]])
    ϕ_g = np.array([[0], [-1]])
    ϕ_i = np.array([[-1], [ψ_1]])
    γ = np.array([[0], [0]])
    
    δ_k = np.array([[0]])
    θ_k = np.array([[0]])
    
    ρ_s = 0.8
    ρ_d = 0.8
    
    a22 = np.array([[1,   0,   0], 
                    [0, ρ_s,   0], 
                    [0,   0, ρ_d]])
                    
    c2 = np.array([[0, 0], [10, 0], [0, 10]])
    ub = np.array([[30, 0, 1]])
    ud = np.array([[10, 1, 0], [0, 0, 0]])
    
    Info1 = Information(a22, c2, ub, ud)
    Tech1 = Technology(ϕ_c, ϕ_g, ϕ_i, γ, δ_k, θ_k)
    Pref1 = Preferences(β, l_λ, π_h, δ_h, θ_h)
    
    Econ1 = DLE(Info1, Tech1, Pref1)

We create three other instances by:

1. Raising :math:`\alpha_d` to 2
2. Raising k to 7
3. Raising k to 10

.. code-block:: python3

    α_d = np.array([[2]])
    l_λ = np.hstack((α_d, λ_1))
    Pref2 = Preferences(β, l_λ, π_h, δ_h, θ_h)
    Econ2 = DLE(Info1, Tech1, Pref2)
    
    α_d = np.array([[0.1]])
    
    k = 7
    λ_1 = np.ones((1, k)) * ε_1
    l_λ = np.hstack((α_d, λ_1))
    d1 = np.vstack((δ_n, np.zeros((k - 1, 1))))
    d2 = np.hstack((d1, np.eye(k)))
    δ_h = np.vstack((d2, np.zeros((1, k+1))))
    θ_h = np.vstack((np.zeros((k, 1)), 
                     np.ones((1, 1))))
    
    Pref3 = Preferences(β, l_λ, π_h, δ_h, θ_h)
    Econ3 = DLE(Info1, Tech1, Pref3)
    
    k = 10
    λ_1 = np.ones((1, k)) * ε_1
    l_λ = np.hstack((α_d, λ_1))
    d1 = np.vstack((δ_n, np.zeros((k - 1, 1))))
    d2 = np.hstack((d1, np.eye(k)))
    δ_h = np.vstack((d2, np.zeros((1, k + 1))))
    θ_h = np.vstack((np.zeros((k, 1)), 
                     np.ones((1, 1))))
    
    Pref4 = Preferences(β, l_λ, π_h, δ_h, θ_h)
    Econ4 = DLE(Info1, Tech1, Pref4)

    shock_demand = np.array([[0], [1]])
    
    Econ1.irf(ts_length=25, shock=shock_demand)
    Econ2.irf(ts_length=25, shock=shock_demand)
    Econ3.irf(ts_length=25, shock=shock_demand)
    Econ4.irf(ts_length=25, shock=shock_demand)

The first figure plots the impulse response of :math:`n_t` (on the left)
and :math:`N_t` (on the right) to a positive demand shock, for
:math:`\alpha_d = 0.1` and :math:`\alpha_d = 2`

When :math:`\alpha_d = 2`, the number of new students :math:`n_t` rises
initially, but the response then turns negative

A positive demand shock raises wages, drawing new students into the
profession

However, these new students raise :math:`N_t`

The higher is :math:`\alpha_d`, the larger the effect of this rise in
:math:`N_t` on wages

This counteracts the demand shock's positive effect on wages, reducing
the number of new students in subsequent periods

Consequently, when :math:`\alpha_d` is lower, the effect of a demand
shock on :math:`N_t` is larger

.. code-block:: python3

    plt.figure(figsize=(12, 4))
    plt.subplot(121)
    plt.plot(Econ1.c_irf,label='$\\alpha_d = 0.1$')
    plt.plot(Econ2.c_irf,label='$\\alpha_d = 2$')
    plt.legend()
    plt.title('Response of $n_t$ to a demand shock')
    
    plt.subplot(122)
    plt.plot(Econ1.h_irf[:, 0], label='$\\alpha_d = 0.1$')
    plt.plot(Econ2.h_irf[:, 0], label='$\\alpha_d = 24$')
    plt.legend()
    plt.title('Response of $N_t$ to a demand shock')
    plt.show()

The next figure plots the impulse response of :math:`n_t` (on the left)
and :math:`N_t` (on the right) to a positive demand shock, for
:math:`k=4`, :math:`k=7` and :math:`k=10` (with :math:`\alpha_d = 0.1`)

.. code-block:: python3

    plt.figure(figsize=(12, 4))
    plt.subplot(121)
    plt.plot(Econ1.c_irf, label='$k=4$')
    plt.plot(Econ3.c_irf, label='$k=7$')
    plt.plot(Econ4.c_irf, label='$k=10$')
    plt.legend()
    plt.title('Response of $n_t$ to a demand shock')
    
    plt.subplot(122)
    plt.plot(Econ1.h_irf[:,0], label='$k=4$')
    plt.plot(Econ3.h_irf[:,0], label='$k=7$')
    plt.plot(Econ4.h_irf[:,0], label='$k=10$')
    plt.legend()
    plt.title('Response of $N_t$ to a demand shock')
    plt.show()


Both panels in the above figure show that raising k lowers the effect of
a positive demand shock on entry into the engineering profession

Increasing the number of periods of schooling lowers
the number of new students in response to a demand shock

This occurs because  with longer required schooling, new students ultimately benefit less from the impact of that shock on wages
